# decam_ddf_tools
Tools for analyzing the DECam DDF program data.

Note:

 * "object" refers to a single detection in a difference image
 * "candidate" refers to associated detections at a given sky location
 * "probably-real" candidates means >10 detections, mean R/B>0.4
   * cuts shown to be reasonable in `source_detection_summary_figures.ipynb/`
   * cuts also discussed in Section 3 of Graham et al. (in prep)


## Notebooks (Complete)

### image_processing_summary.ipynb

**Description**<br>
 * Create plots to analyze the DDF's image quality parameters.
   * e.g., limiting magnitude, sky background, seeing, and zeropoint
   * how parameters are correlated with moon separation/illumination

**Inputs/Outputs**<br>
 * inputs are Rob's databases, requires password
 * outputs are plots in `image_processing_summary_figures/`

### source_detection_summary.ipynb

**Description**<br>
 * Create plots to explore object detection and R/B scores vs. image quality.
 * Identify **"probably-real" candidates (>10 detections, mean R/B>0.4)** and create data files just for these candidates.
 * Write two naive filters to test methods for identifying transients and fast-risers with alerts. Find they're too simple to work well.
   * 'Transients' as candidates with >=5 objects in two consecutive nights in any filter (118 candidates)
   * 'Fast Risers' as candidates with >=5 objects in the first night in any filter, all brightening (0 candidates)

**Inputs/Outputs**<br>
 * inputs are Rob's databases, requires password
 * output plots are in `source_detection_summary_figures/`
 * output files of **"probably-real"** candidate data are in `source_detection_summary_files/`
   * candidates.dat (summary statistics for "probably-real" candidates, like number of detections)
   * candidate_objects_field.dat (all objects for all "probably-real" candidates)
   * exposures_field.dat (data for all exposures, e.g., limiting magnitudes, seeing)

### candidate_nightly_epochs.ipynb

**Description**<br>
 * Use the data files of **"probably-real" candidates** and combine intra-night detections (objects) into nightly-epoch photometry.
 * Calculate summary parameters for the nightly-epoch lightcurves like duration and amplitude.

**Inputs/Outputs**<br>
 * inputs are the candidate data files in `source_detection_summary_files/` (no password)
 * output files are in `candidate_nightly_epochs_files/`
   * candidate_lightcurves.dat (combined nightly-epoch photometry, and magnitude limits)
   * candidate_lightcurve_parameters.dat (duration, amplitude, and number of epochs)


## Notebooks In Progress.

### candidate_summary.ipynb

TBD; explore trends in the candidate lightcurve parameters, attempt to identify transient types.

<br>

### explore_galactic_tables.ipynb

TBD.

### SNsearch.ipynb
The purpose of this notebook is to search through the extragalactic field to identify candidates that are likely supernovae. This is done by selecting every candidate that has at least X detections over at least Y days, with a change of at least Z mag, and that doesn't increase in brightness more than once

### SNIasearch.ipynb
Essentially the same as SNsearch.ipynb, but it requires that (after peak r brightness) rmag < gmag in an effort to identify specifically type Ia SNe.

### fastrisers.ipynb
This notebook searches the extragalactic fields for candidates that (on their first night of detection) rose monotonically by at least X mag over at least Y detections in the same night.

<br>

## Modules:

decam_utils.py : Useful functions for exploring our data. Currently contains:
 * plotlc(), a function that makes a lightcurve for a chosen candidate
 * rm_dupes(), a function that removes duplicate rows from arrays
 * pull_exptimes(), a function that updates fnm_exptime.txt

## Input data files:

archive_image_list.txt : generated by MLG using NOIRLab's DataLab to access DECam images from archive; contains a bunch of metadata for DDF images (RA, Dec, MJD, filter, airmass, target, exposure time, sequence ID, image type classification, moon separation, moon illumination, estimate of sky background in counts)

<br>
<br>

## Old Stuff

### old_files

archive_image_list_2021A.txt : deprecated; use archive_image_list.txt

moondata.txt : deprecated; use the moon data in archive_image_list.txt

medpixval.txt : deprecated; use the moon data in archive_image_list.txt

fnm_exptime : A table of filenames and exposure times, generated using the decam_utils.pull_exptimes() function (which pulls from Rob's database)

### old_nbs

basics_COSMOS.ipynb : answers a few basics questions about the extragalactic field data-- how many objects and candidates were detected, how objects are distributed among candidates, and how those distributions change when an R/B cutoff is applied.

sources_per_image_COSMOS.ipynb : looks at how many "good" (R/B > 0.6) objects are found per extragalactic field image, and at how a candidate's average R/B score is correlated to the number of times it is detected.

weather_sky_moon_COSMOS.ipynb : examines correlations between sky factors (moon distance, moon illumination, seeing, and zero-point magnitude) and the number of "good" (R/B > 0.6) object detections per exposure.

RB.ipynb : This notebook looks for correlations between the legitimacy of candidates and the RB scores of their candidates